
h1. Overview

The Infinite Monkeywrench (IMW) is a Ruby frameworks to simplify the
tasks of acquiring, extracting, transforming, loading, and packaging
data.  It has the following goals:

* Minimize **programmer time** even at the expense of increasing run
  time.

* Take data through a full transformation from raw source to packaged
  purity in as few lines of code as possible.

* Treat data records as objects as much as possible.

* Use instead of repeat better code that already exists in other
  libraries (FasterCSV, I'm talkin' to you).

* Make what's common easy without making what's uncommon impossible.

* Work with messy data as well as clean data.

* Let you incorporate your own tools wherever you choose to.

The Infinite Monkeywrench is a powerful tool but it is not always the
right one to use.  IMW is **not** designed for

* Scraping vast amounts of data (go and read about "http://github.com/infochimps/wukong":Wuclan)

* Really, really big datasets (go and read about "http://github.com/infochimps/wukong":Wukong)

* Data mining

* Data visualization


h2. Setup



h2. Actually processing your data

The Infinite Monkeywrench is built atop ActiveResource, the data model that
powers Ruby on Rails.  This gives us

* a well-known, well-tested, database-agnostic data model
* ability to export from that datamodel to sqlite3, csv, yaml, xml and JSON with
  vernacular structure
* active_resource for both an outgoing API and an ingoing data socket: if
  someone creates an active_resource facade to an external API we get the
  data

It also demonstrates our commitment to the "minimize programmer time, not run
time" philosophy, but it's worked for us so far.
